Before we talk about where compliance obligations come from,
we have to talk about how your organization
becomes connected to those obligations in the first place.
What's the nexus? In general,
there are three ways that an organization can become attached to an obligation.
First, by something that you already do.
This is what most individuals think about when discussing compliance.
This is when a business is engaged in a particular activity which
causes the requirement of meeting specific levels of compliance.
For example, HIPAA, HITECH,
PCI, DSS, FedRAMP or others.
Then there are contracts.
Through customer contracts or master service agreements,
organizations may contract to live up to specific compliance frameworks
or other compliance obligations which are actually defined in those contracts themselves.
Then finally, there's adoption.
These are the things as an organization that you want to do.
Organizations may choose to adopt certain compliance obligations in order to become
more attractive to potential customers or prior to entering a new phase of business.
This is very common in a service provider or SaaS model.
For instance, HIPAA is a US healthcare standard.
What happens though if your organization wants to
start processing healthcare data in France next year?
Is there a different compliance obligation that you'd need to live up to?
Let's set aside contractual obligations for just a moment.
As it relates to business requirements and adoption of compliance obligations,
many of these do come from laws or
regulations directed in an industry or a business activity.
But many of them are also standards developed
by industry consortium's. Here's some examples.
Let's think about obligations required by your business activities.
These are specific to an industry or an activity like PCI,
which relates to payment card processing,
this standard is created by a payment card consortium.
It's not a law. Or there's HIPAA which relates to US healthcare and healthcare records.
This is a US regulation.
In terms of adopting compliance obligations as I said before,
you can adopt anything you want but it's typically done in or a
new business or prove that you have some minimum level of security control.
Maybe for instance, your business wants to start processing credit cards.
You'd probably want to adopt PCI before you
get to the time when you actually start processing credit cards.
But you can adopt general control standards as well.
One's not tied to a specific business activity like ISO 27001 for instance.
A standard like this is used to make
your business more attractive to prospective customers.
Why does all of this matter?
Saying that you're compliant with a standard or certifying that you're
compliant can create tremendous business advantages.
Take for example, a SOC 2 assessment.
A SOC 2 is used to assess
existing security controls to ensure that they're
functioning as the organization expects.
A SOC 2 certification must be performed by a certified accounting firm and
a SOC 2 certification serves as
a barrier to entry for most Software as a Service providers.
What I mean is a SaaS provider if you don't maintain a SOC 2,
it can be difficult to gain customers because it's really become
recognized as an absolute minimum bar.
Then there are more direct negative consequences.
In some cases, not being compliant with
the standard can create direct penalties for compliance.
The payment card industry consortium for instance,
can fine you for processing credit cards without being PCI certified.
Or in the case of HIPAA,
the Department of Health and Human Services maintains
something that's generally referred to as the wall of shame.
That lists companies who have been fined by the department for HIPAA violations.
The largest fines are reserved for
those companies that show a willful neglect in complying with HIPAA.
Two of the more challenging tasks for compliance professional are 1,
understanding what compliance obligations apply to an organization and then 2,
recommending which requirements the business may want to adopt.
In a large part,
that's a function of both experience working as a
compliance professional and then
also experience understanding the context of the business.
In the meantime, there's a lot of great information online about
compliance obligations as they relate to specific types of businesses.
But I want to caution you here.
It's always best to read the actual standards, regulations, etc.
Even if I find a compelling article that I think breaks down
a compliance obligation really well by section,
I still want to read the actual text.
The reason for that is that way I can ensure the obligation is right for my organization.
In addition to that,
I want to make sure that I develop a deep understanding of what's in that obligation so
that I can establish myself as an expert in that document and that field.
Then finally, it helps me avoid committing
the organization to something based on misleading claims.
Meaning that a vendor or a software provider would say that
certain organizations must comply with
an obligation when perhaps they don't really need to.
Now for this reason,
I actually say that about 80 percent of the compliance job is reading comprehension,
because you've got to establish yourself as
an expert with each obligation that your organization should meet.
Finally, speaking of reading,
let's spend a few minutes on contracts.
Contract language has pretty quickly
become a hefty task for most compliance professionals.
Here's why, your customers have to comply with certain security obligations
themselves and they want to make sure that
their entire ecosystem including their vendors, are secure as well.
Now a big part of the reason for that is because of
the high profile breaches that we see like the target breach,
which originated via a vendor.
So now you have more and more customers writing
contract language to ensure that their vendors live up to their security expectations.
Our legal departments are actually turning to
compliance professionals to interpret the security language for them.
Now, normally, that language shows up in three ways.
There can be specific provisions,
meaning there's a language in the contract that spells out a behavior
like you must audit firewall logs one time per week.
Or there can be a rider which might refer to
another document altogether that then spells out specific behaviors
or the contract might spell out or dictate that you
comply with a specific obligation like ISO 27001 for example,
or HIPAA for example.
Now what happens if you choose not to do what the customer asks?
Well the consequences are,
you might lose customers.
They may choose to work with another vendor altogether.
Or if you commit to something and fail to follow through,
there may be additional contract provisions for fines,
remediation schedules, or contract termination.